Oxford Bookworms. Stage 1. Scotland. By Steve Flinders. Read by
Joan Walker. Published
Chapter 1. A special country. There is nowhere like Scotland.
Scotland is a country in a
country. It is part of Great Britain, England, Scotland and
Wales, and of the United Kingdom,
England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Scotland is in the
far north west of Europe
between the Atlantic Ocean and the North Sea. It is
often cold and grey and it rains a lot in
some parts of the country. But the people of Scotland
love their country and many visitors
to Scotland love it too. They love the beautiful hills
and mountains of the north, the sea and the
and Scottish people are special too, often warm and friendly.
There are about five million
people in Scotland. Most Scots live in the south, in
or near the big cities of Edinburgh and Glasgow.
Most of the north of the country is very empty,
not many people live there. A Scottish person
is also called a Scott, but you cannot talk about
a Scotch person. Scotch means whiskey, a drink made
in Scotland. Scottish people are British, because Scotland is part
of Great Britain,
but you must not call Scottish people English. The Scots
and the English are different.
These days everyone in Scotland speaks English, but at one
time people in the north and west
of Scotland did not speak English. They had a different
language, a beautiful language called Gaelic.
About 60,000 people, 1% of the people in
Scotland speak Gaelic now, but many more want Gaelic in
their lives because it is part of the story of
Scotland. Scotland is not a very hot country.
In the summer the days are long and it can
be warm, but in the winter the days can be
just seven
hours long and it often rains. For many years Scotland
was a poor country, but now things are
better for most people. There is oil and gas in
the sea between Scotland and Norway.
Edinburgh is an important place for money and there are
big banks there like the Royal Bank of
Scotland. People in many countries drink Scotch whiskey and the
whiskey business makes a lot
of money for Scotland. Tourists visit this beautiful country and
that brings money to Scotland too.
Many people love living and working there and more than
20 million visitors go to Scotland each year.
Chapter 2 Scotland is the oldest country in the world.
Why? Because the hills of the Northwest and the Hebridean
Islands are more than 2,700 million years
old. You can walk on some of the oldest rocks
in the world there. People first lived there 9,000
years
ago. At Scarabre on the Orkney Islands in the far
north of Scotland you can see the houses of early
people from about 5,000 years ago. The houses at
Nap of Hower also on the Orkneys are the oldest
in Europe. The Romans went to Scotland but they did
not stay there for long. Between AD 122 and 128
they built Hadrian's Wall. It was 117 kilometres long and
went from sea to sea across the most
northern part of England. The Romans stayed in England for
nearly 300 years until about AD 400
and then they left and went back to Rome. Today
you can visit Hadrian's Wall in the north of
England and walk along parts of it. Who were the
first Scots? The people north of Hadrian's Wall
were called Picts by the Romans. We can still see
some of their story in their pictures in stone
but there were also Scotty from Ireland. The name Scotland
comes from the Scotty. Vikings from Norway
and some English people from the south. These different peoples
came under one king in the 800s.
The first king of all the Scots many people say
was Kenneth MacAlpin. He was king from 843 to 858.
But the most famous Scottish king of this early time
is Macbeth. 1040 to 1057. He is famous
but he was not worse than many other kings of
those early days. There were many battles
between England and Scotland. One important Scot was William Wallace,
about 1270 to 1305.
You can learn about him in the film Braveheart. Then
in 1314 the Scottish king Robert the Bruce
took his men to the battle of Banachban. After the
battle 10,000 Englishmen were dead
and Robert became one of the most important kings in
the story of Scotland.
Soon after Scotland was free and stayed free for nearly
300 years.
In 1542 a little girl called Mary became queen of
Scotland. She was six days old and only the second
woman to be queen of this country.
Mary Queen of Scots became a tall and beautiful woman
but some Scots did not want her to be queen.
Mary went to England and asked Elizabeth the English Queen
for help but she did not get it.
She never returned to Scotland and died in England after
19 years. You can read Mary's story in Mary Queen
of Scots, Oxford bookworms stage one.
Mary's son James Stewart became king of Scotland and then
King James I of England too.
In 1707 the two countries became Great Britain.
In the 1700s Scotland was more like two countries than
one. There were rich cities in the south but there
were poor country people in the highlands, the hill country
in the centre and the north of Scotland.
At that time Edinburgh was one of the most important
cities in Europe and many famous thinkers lived there.
Then in the 1800s Glasgow became rich. People built big
ships there and later trains.
So the south of Scotland had busy cities with beautiful
buildings, lots of work and money.
In the highlands things were very different. After 1714 Great
Britain had German kings from Hanover in North Germany.
Many Scots in the highlands wanted a Scottish king, someone
from the Stewart family like Mary and James, not a
German king in London.
They wanted Charles Stewart, Bonnie Prince Charlie, the grandson of
the last Stewart king, James II of England and the
7th of Scotland.
Charles Stewart left France and came to Scotland. He wanted
to be king of Scotland and England too.
But Charles and his men lost the battle of Culloden
near Inverness in 1746. Culloden was the last big battle
in Great Britain.
After the battle the British soldiers looked for Charles but
he went into the hills.
The people of the highlands and the islands helped him
to go back to France but life became difficult for
them after that.
The British soldiers stayed in the highlands and took away
houses and land from the friends of Charles Stewart.
After this many poor families left the highlands and went
to the cities in the south of Scotland or to
other countries, the USA, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
Some went because they wanted to begin a new life
but others went because the rich owners of the land
in Scotland wanted to put animals there.
Between 1840 and 1880 40,000 people left just one
island, the island of Sky.
Life became more difficult in the 1900s but oil and
gas in the North Sea began to bring money to
Scotland again in the 1970s.
Let's look now at some of the famous places in
the Scotland of today.
Chapter 3 Edinburgh
Many people begin a visit to Scotland in Edinburgh, the
capital city.
Edinburgh is an old city with many important and interesting
buildings and about 470,000 people live there.
After London, Edinburgh is the second city for visitors in
Britain.
Come to Edinburgh by train from the south and you
arrive at Waverly station.
When you come out of the station, Edinburgh Castle is
in front of you, high up on a hill.
From the castle, you can see all over the city.
You can see the famous one o'clock gum and
at one o'clock from Monday to Saturday, you can
hear it too.
It makes a very big noise. Edinburgh is built on
hills but you can walk around the city easily.
From the castle, you can go down the royal mile
to Holy Roode house.
This building, 300 years old, is the home of Queen
Elizabeth II when she comes to Edinburgh.
This part of the city is called the Old Town.
Then take a walk along Princess Street in the New
Town.
The New Town, 1767 to 1840, is more than 150
years old now but still has this name.
Some shops have the famous Scottish tartans.
Each clan, a big old Scottish family, is called the
clan, has its own tartan.
And in the windows, you can see the different tartans
for famous Scottish clans.
People with a Scottish family name can buy and wear
the family tartan.
People without a Scottish name can buy and wear a
tartan too.
Edinburgh has many wonderful things.
The buildings in the New Town in Charlotte Square, for
example, are very beautiful.
There are very good museums.
The National Museum of Scotland is near the royal mile
and tells you a lot about the Scotland of yesterday
and today.
The National Gallery of Scotland, near the castle, has beautiful
pictures from Scotland and from many other countries too.
In August, thousands of people come to the Edinburgh Festival.
Singing, dancing, cinema, books, pictures, theatre.
You can see and do hundreds of different things at
the festival.
And also in August, every evening for three weeks, you
can go to the Edinburgh Military Tattoo at Edinburgh Castle.
There, you can see soldiers and hear music from Scotland
and from lots of other countries.
On the 31st of December, everyone wants to be in
the city centre for the famous Street Party for Hognonay.
That is the Scottish name for New Year's Eve.
But there are only 100,000 tickets and they go
very quickly.
The party begins in one year and finishes in the
next. That is a good time.
Chapter 4
About 630,000 people live in the city and about
1.2 million in and near it.
It is not very far from Edinburgh, about 50 minutes
by train, but it is very different.
The river Clyde runs through the centre of Glasgow and
it has an important part in the story of Glasgow.
200 years ago, Glasgow was a small town.
Then British ships began to go all over the world.
Big ships came up and down the river Clyde.
They carried things from other countries.
In the 1800s, Britain was the richest country in the
world.
Shipbuilding became very important and Glasgow became a city of
shipbuilders.
At one time, it was the fourth largest city in
Europe after London, Paris and Berlin.
You can see some of the beautiful buildings from that
time in George Square.
Today, there is not much shipbuilding. Some parts of Glasgow
are very poor and many people have no work.
But things are changing in Glasgow. Ask a glass region,
a person from Glasgow.
To them, Glasgow is the friendliest city in Britain and
one of the most exciting cities in Britain too.
There are lots of things to do at night in
Glasgow.
It is perhaps the best city in Britain after London
for shopping too.
Like Edinburgh, it is a green city. It has 70
parks and you can often see the hills from the
centre of the city.
It is a city of museums. You can see many
beautiful pictures in the Glasgow City Museum and Art Gallery
and in the Borough Collection and Pollock House, south of
the Clyde.
It is the city of Charles Renney Mackintosh.
About 100 years ago, Mackintosh and three friends began a
new look in building, Art Nouveau.
Much of Mackintosh's best work is in Glasgow.
His Glasgow School of Art is on Renfrew Street.
After you visit it, you can have a coffee at
the Willow Tea Rooms, also by Mackintosh, on Socki Hall
Street.
And Glasgow is, of course, a big football city.
You can watch Glasgow Celtic at Celtic Park or Glasgow
Rangers at the Ibrox Stadium
on Saturdays between August and May.
Chapter 5. Four Scottish Cities
Aberdeen, with 192,000 people, is the third biggest city
in Scotland.
It is in the east of the country, on the
north sea, and it is between two rivers, the D
and the Don.
Fishing and shipbuilding were once important here, but now it
is famous as the oil capital of the UK.
Boats and planes leave Aberdeen every day for the oil
and gas fields of the north sea.
It has two universities and many wonderful parks and gardens.
The musicians, Annie Lennox and Evelyn Glenny, both come from
Aberdeen.
Visitors to Aberdeen often go to its beautiful long beach
or go climbing south of the city.
Aberdeen is close to the cold and beautiful mountains called
the Cangorms, and there are more than 350 castles in
this part of the country.
One of them is Balmoral, the Queen's Castle.
Queen Elizabeth comes here every summer.
Dundee, on the river Tay, is near the north sea
too.
Like Glasgow and Aberdeen, it was once important for shipbuilding.
The ship Discovery was built here and left Dundee in
1901 for Antarctica.
Now, more than a hundred years later, the ship is
back in Dundee again and you can visit it there.
Dundee is also famous for Marmalade.
The Kila family began making orange marmalade here in 1797
and it became famous all over the world.
Inverness is the only city in the Highlands.
The best bagpipers in the world come here to play
every September.
It is close to the beautiful lake called Loch Ness.
Loch is the Gaelic word for lake.
A very big animal called the Loch Ness Monster, or
Nessie, lives in Loch Ness.
An old story says this and thousands of tourists go
there every year to look for it, but Nessie does
not come.
Perhaps this is just a story for tourists.
Then there is Stirling to the northeast of Glasgow.
Many visitors go through Stirling when they go to the
Highlands.
It has a wonderful castle, one of the biggest and
most important castles in Scotland.
The Battle of Bannekburne in 1314 was near here and
here Mary became Queen of Scotland when she was only
six days old.
Chapter 6. Highlands and Islands
There are not a lot of people here, only eight
people per square kilometre, but there is a lot of
beautiful country with locks, rivers and hills.
The Highlands have two of the most wonderful train journeys
in the world, from Inverness to Kyle of Lachauch and
from Fort William to Mallag.
All visitors can go by road past the beautiful Loch
Lomond to the mountains at Glencoe.
Do you love to be out of the cities, walking,
climbing, looking for birds and animals or taking photos?
Then the Highlands are for you.
The mountains are not very high.
Ben Nevis, the highest in the UK, is 1,344
metres, but they can be difficult.
Sometimes cold weather comes from the north, so walkers and
climbers need to be careful in the winter.
And in the summer too.
What can you see in the Highlands?
There are not many trees on the hills, but there
is beautiful heaven.
The water in the locks is cold and dark.
Red deer run across the hills, and perhaps you can
see golden eagles high up in the sky.
When you leave the road, you are soon in empty
country.
There is nothing but the hills and the sky, the
birds and the animals.
Islands Scotland has hundreds of islands, and life is different
there.
The island towns are small.
On some islands, like sky and the islands of the
Hebrides, many of the people speak Gaelic.
On the islands of Lewis and Harris, some people do
not work, drive or watch TV on Sundays.
In the north, the islands of Orkney and Shetland are
nearer to Norway than to London.
From open, in the west of Scotland, you can go
to some of the islands in the inner Hebrides.
Here, you can see sea animals, like seals.
From mull, you can go to see the beautiful caves
of Stapha, or you can visit Iona.
St Colombo came to the small island of Iona from
Ireland in 563, and began to teach people about Christianity.
Today, Iona is an important Christian centre, and half a
million people go there every year.
The bodies of Kenneth MacAlpin and other Scottish kings are
here on Iona.
You can also go to Sky, perhaps the most famous
and the most beautiful of the islands of Scotland,
and see the dark mountains called the Kulin near the
sea.
From other pool, you can go across to Lewis in
the outer Hebrides.
There are long, white, empty beaches here, and the 5
,000-year-old stone circle at Kalanish.
There are 50 standing stones at Kalanish.
Time goes more slowly in this quiet, special place.
Chapter 7
Sport and Free Time
Many Scottish people love sport, and in Scotland, many people
play golf, the rich and the not-so rich.
Golf began in this country, and the golf capital of
Scotland is St Andrews, a small university city near Edinburgh.
There are more than 400 golf courses in Scotland, and
many of them are very beautiful.
In the summer, when the days are long, you can
play from 7 in the morning to 10 at night.
Football is also very important.
In 2006, Scotland had the 10th highest number of football
clubs of any country in the world.
Celtic and Rangers are the biggest and the most famous
Scottish clubs,
but others, like Aberdeen, also do well in Scotland and
in Europe.
The Scots play rugby football too, and it is an
important sport in Scotland.
In 1990, Scotland beat England, Wales, Ireland and France at
rugby, and every year the Scots want to do this
again.
But now Italy plays too, so they need to beat
five countries, not four.
Scotland's hills and mountains are good for sports too, walking,
climbing, cycling and more.
And there are lots of exciting sports on, in and
under the water, in the locks, rivers and the sea.
You can take a kayak down a fast river, for
example, or out to sea.
The rain does not matter when you do these sports.
Between May and September, in more than a hundred different
places in Scotland, people meet at a Highland Games,
a festival of Scottish sports and music.
You can see big men tossing the camber, listen to
Scottish music on the back pipes and watch Scottish dancing.
Not all Scots men have kilts, but more and more
of them wear one sometimes, and lots of people wear
kilts to the games.
When a Scotsman wears a kilt, he is saying, I
like being Scottish.
A kilt needs about six metres of tartan.
When one of the big clans, like Clan Donald, Mackenzie
or Stuart has a big meeting, people come from many
countries.
Many of them wear kilts in the clan tartan when
they come.
One clan in the USA, Clan Donald, has 4,000
families.
Their families went from Scotland to the USA, perhaps 150
years ago, but they still want to be Scottish.
Chapter 8
5. Great Scots
Scotland is not a big country and does not have
many people, but there are many famous and important Scots.
Here are five of them.
Robert Adam, 1728-1792, made some of the best buildings
in Great Britain in the second half of the 1700s.
He went to school and university in Edinburgh, and then
to Rome for five years to learn about the buildings
there.
Then he came back to Britain.
He worked on the new town in Edinburgh, and you
can see buildings by him in Charlotte Square.
There are many beautiful buildings by Adam in England and
Scotland.
People come from all over Europe and America to look
at them.
David Hume, 1711-1776, was a great thinker and writer.
People still read and talk about his books today because
they are so important.
He also wrote a very long history of England, at
that time the most important book of this kind.
Hume went to the University of Edinburgh when he was
12 years old.
Later he went to France and made friends with famous
French thinkers like Voltaire and Rousseau.
His most important book is A Treatise of Human Nature,
1739-1740.
The next great Scott is Robert Burns, 1759-1796.
The Scots call him Robbie or Robbie Burns.
He was born into a poor country family, the oldest
of seven children near air in southwest Scotland.
He began writing poems when he was still a boy.
He wrote about important things, about life and love, rich
people and poor people and Scotland.
His words still speak to us today and many Scots
love his poems.
Burns was born on the 25th of January and that
night is called Burns Night by the Scots.
On Burns Night there are special dinners, not just in
Scotland but for Scottish people in other countries too.
They eat haggis, a special Scottish food, drink whiskey and
say poems by Burns.
And at midnight on the 31st of December in many
English-speaking countries, people sing the words of Burns when
they sing,
Old Lang Zion.
The name of the song means something like long, long
ago.
James Watt, 1736-1819 was born in Greenock near Glasgow
and did not often go to school when he was
a child.
He stayed at home and his mother was his teacher.
Watt was a quick thinker and he liked to build
things with his hands.
He got work building things for the teachers at the
University of Glasgow.
There he became interested in steam engines.
He began a business with his friend Matthew Bolton and
from 1794 to 1824 they made 1,164 steam engines.
These engines changed Great Britain and the world.
After what? The world was a different place.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, 1859-1930 was born in Edinburgh,
went to the University of Edinburgh
and became a doctor.
But he did not make much money as a doctor.
So he began to write stories about a detective called
Sherlock Holmes.
Soon Sherlock Holmes was famous and Conan Doyle became rich
and famous too.
He wrote many stories about Holmes and his friend Doctor
Watson and also wrote stories about a man called Professor
Challenger.
There are films of many Sherlock Holmes stories and you
can read some of them in bookworms.
Sherlock Holmes and the Duke's son and Sherlock Holmes and
the Sport of Kings.
Oxford bookworms stage 1.
Do you know any other great Scots?
Chapter 9. Food and Drink. Food.
In the earliest days Scottish people took their food from
the sea, the rivers and the land.
From the sea and the rivers came fish.
And from the land they got fruit, vegetables and meat.
And they got oats from the land too.
They made their bread from oats and they made porridge
from oats and water for a hot breakfast.
People still eat all of these things in Scotland today,
but they eat new things too.
From 1900 on many people began to come to Scotland
from countries like Italy and India
and they brought different food with them.
There is a lot of good food in Scotland.
It is famous for its fish like salmon and haddock
and for other food from the sea.
Fish farming is very important for Scotland.
It gives work to about 6,000 people and brings
lots of money into the country.
Then there is Scottish beef, the best beef in the
world the Scots say.
And haggis made from meat, oats and other things.
Scottish raspberries are also very good.
The Scots like to make a dish called kranakim with
raspberries, oats and whiskey.
People with lots of money can go to a hotel
like Glen Eagles near Perth.
Perhaps the most famous hotel in Scotland today.
It has 232 bedrooms, 3 golf courses and some of
the best Scottish food.
But good food is not a part of life for
everybody in Scotland and some poorer Scots do not eat
very well.
British men usually live to 77 years old but in
some parts of Glasgow they only live to 54.
Better food is very important for Scottish people today and
tomorrow.
Drink.
The word whiskey comes from the Gaelic, whiskey by the
water of life.
Whiskey also called Scotch is made in a distillery.
There are more than 100 distilleries in Scotland.
Some near Edinburgh and Glasgow in the south.
One on the island of Sky and three on the
Orkneys in the north.
There are nine on the small island of Isla.
About half of the distilleries are near the river Spain,
east of Inverness.
Many visitors like to visit the distilleries there and try
the different whiskeys.
Visitors to Edinburgh can visit the Scotch Whiskey Heritage Centre
near the castle.
Whiskey is good but another drink in Scotland is better.
Water.
The whiskey is good because the water from the hills
is good.
On a hot day a drink of Scottish hill water
can be the best drink in the world.
Chapter 10
Scotland and the World
Scotland is a small country.
Only five million people live there.
But for millions more across the world Scotland is very
important.
Why is this?
In the 1800s many people left Scotland and went to
other countries.
People in the Highlands left their homes and villages because
they were very poor and hungry.
Sometimes the rich people there wanted them to leave.
Many others from the south of Scotland left because they
wanted a better life in a new country.
Between the 1820s and 1914 more than two million people
went from Scotland across the
seas to the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
More went in the 1920s.
Today there are six million Scottish Americans in the USA.
Every year many people walk through New York on the
6th of April, tartan day.
A lot of Scottish Americans go back to Scotland as
tourists.
They want to find their past and to understand it.
So Scotland is important in the story of other countries
too.
Two great Scots in the USA are Alexander Graham Bell
1847-1922 and Andrew Carnegie 1837-1919.
Bell made the first telephone.
He began the Bell Telephone Company in 1877 and by
1885 more than 150,000 people in the
USA had telephones.
In 1915 he made the first telephone call across the
United States from New York to San Francisco.
After he died in Canada at the age of 75
all the telephones in North America were quiet
for one minute to remember him.
Andrew Carnegie's family left Scotland when he was 11 and
went to the USA.
Carnegie worked hard and by the 1880s he had many
businesses and was very rich, the richest
man in the world.
When he stopped working he gave his money to other
people.
Carnegie's money built schools, universities and other buildings in the
USA, the UK,
Australia, New Zealand and Ireland.
Today his money still helps millions of people around the
world every year.
Many Scots love to visit other countries and do new
things.
David Livingston 1813-1873 went to Africa to begin schools
and to tell Africans about
Christianity.
He was the first European to see the Victoria Falls
between Zambia and Zimbabwe.
And the first to go across Africa from the Atlantic
in the West to the Indian Ocean in
the East.
Alan Bean born 1932 is a Scottish American.
When he went to the moon in 1969 only the
fourth man to walk on the moon.
He took some tartan with him.
Scots like to go to new places.
Who is the most famous Scot in the world today?
To many people it is the film star Sean Connery
born 1930.
Sean Connery did a lot of different jobs before he
began working in television and cinema.
Then in 1962 he was James Bond in the first
James Bond film Doctor No.
After this he was famous everywhere.
He made six more James Bond films and made many
other films after that.
To many people his best film is The Untouchables 1987.
Connery does not make films now and does not live
in Scotland but he loves Scotland very
much and does not want it to be part of
the United Kingdom.
Chapter 11 Scotland Today and Tomorrow
The story of Scotland is interesting and sometimes exciting but
it is not an easy story.
Some Scots like Sean Connery want Scotland to be just
Scotland and not part of the United
Kingdom. Scotland is still a country of rich and poor.
The past is important but many Scots also want to
think about Scotland today and tomorrow.
The Scots in the USA, Australia, Canada and New Zealand
love the old things, the music,
the dancing, the tartans but many of the Scots in
Scotland want their country to look to
the future, not the past. Scotland they say can be
like Norway, a country with 5 million
people and with a lot of money from oil. Scotland
has money from oil, fish farming,
visits from tourists, banks, computers and many other businesses and
there is new life
here, new business, new cinema, new music. Things are changing
in Scotland.
Today there is a Scottish Parliament in Edinburgh. It is
in an interesting new building
on the Royal Mile. People from every town and city
in Scotland come here to talk about
their country. Some Scots want Scotland to speak for itself
in Europe and in the world.
What is in the future for Scotland? Nobody knows but
it is always going to be a beautiful
special place. Perhaps one day you can walk along the
Royal Mile, climb the hills or travel
to the islands and see it for yourself.